Here are the march distances in the Habsburg Empire ca. 1815!

This quote from the book The Grand Strategy of the Habsburg Empire by A. Wess Mitchell also explains how the Habsburgs had to deal with topographic variety of geography in their empire. Habsburg armies had to be ready for wide range of terrain and climate conditions inside the borders of their empire:

"A further complication was the topographic variety of the empire's lands. Straddling the transition zone between western Europe and both Eurasia and Asia Minor, the Habsburg state encompassed several topographically dissimilar subregions. Where most western armies could expect to fight their wars in the rich agricultural lands of middle Europe, with its established seasons of campaigning, foraging, and wintering, Habsburg armies had to be prepared for operations in theaters as diverse as the flooded plains of Walachia, rugged hills of the Balkans, where summertime conditions approximated those of the American Southwest, and snow-bound passes of the Alps and Carpathians. This represented a wider range of terrain and climate conditions than anything confronting other European powers. Only the global empires of Britain, Russia, and the United States had to contend with a greater variety of physical geography in their possessions.
The size and complexity of the empire's physical geography presented the Habsburgs with a power gradient problem familiar to all large empires. Space and terrain consume power as it is projected, with the result that "effective power declines in proportion to distance." Large distances from the empire's center to its periphery complicated the task of asserting political dominance over a contiguous space that is a prerequisite to collecting revenue and building a sound economic base. Militarily, distance and the abundance of rough terrain slowed the movement of armies to confront internal and external enemies."

This reminds me of the quote from historian Eric Hobsbawm which I posted recently where he talked about this period of early 19th century, highlighting just how much faster travelling by sea still was at the time by pointing out that "Boston and New York were in much closer contact with Paris than, let us say, the Carpathian county of Maramaros was with Budapest."

I feel like modern people, used to modern means of transportation which made traveling on land much faster, are more fascinated with sea empires than by continental empires for this reason.

Like for example in the context of medieval Europe we're easily fascinated by Venetian sea power and influence all over the Mediterranean, but I think that, when counting how difficult transportation on land was, large continental kingdoms like medieval Kingdom of Hungary or later Poland-Lithuania were just as impressive in the sense that they were able to keep such large territory together for so long, facing various invasions and internal rebellions.

As far as the Austrian Habsburgs were concerned, pushing the Ottomans out of the historic Kingdom of Hungary in 1699 was a crucial moment for them as it enabled them to use the Danube to connect their lands and expand their frontiers to the vast mountain ranges which you can see on this map.

In this way the Habsburgs were able to unify the Central European territories of Austria, Bohemia and Hungary, something that was already almost achieved by Matthias Corvinus in late 15th century.

The union of these territories meant a creation of a large land empire protected by vast mountain ranges and connected by abundant rivers.

While the Habsburg Austrian Empire does not look as imposing as large global overseas empires that existed at the time, connecting together these distant and diverse territories was in some ways just as monumental task.
